UMLRev: A context-aware feature-oriented approach to support continuous reverse engineering of UML models

Maintaining software design models up to date, such as UML class and sequence diagrams, remains a costly and error-prone task. Recent studies indicate that missing, informal, or outdated design documentation increases the chances of design problems that affect software systems, leading to discontinuity or reengineering due to severe problems. The software industry has widely adopted continuous integration practices. However, an ever-present challenge is keeping the software design models up-to-date. The current reverse engineering approaches often fail to retrieve contextual information concerning application features (functionalities) and transform it into UML models as new releases are generated. Hence, developers end up using generic and outdated UML models. This study, therefore, presents UMLRev (UML Reverse), a context-aware feature-oriented approach to support UML model continuous reverse engineering of fast-changing applications. A support tool was developed and inserted into a continuous integration pipeline to produce UML class and sequence diagrams for each new release, keeping software design models up to date. We run a qualitative empirical study with 22 professionals to evaluate the proposed approach. Our results indicate that most participants (91% ) agree with the proposed approach's usefulness in automatically generating UML diagrams in agile methodologies. Additionally, over 70% indicated that the proposed approach would encourage the adoption of UML models in real-world settings. The results were encouraging and showed the potential for using UMLRev to support the continuous reverse engineering of UML models.
